scripts/data_extraction/download_pp_convert/README.md, before:

# Download pp file from MASS and convert to NetCDF files

This folder contains scripts for streamlining data retrieval from MASS and conversion of pp files to NetCDF files.

This works on JASMIN [sci servers](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/interactive-computing/sci-servers/) (and any other servers with access to mass-cli).

This code is hands off and is works in parallel to retrieve pp and convert to NetCDF files by using scheduling software, `slurm`, so everything runs in parallel on LOTUS compute nodes to speed up conversion.

## Usage

Main script, `driver_download_pp_convert.sh` should be run locally on sci machine of Jasmin.

This script will submit other scripts slurm's `sbatch` for each stash in a user-defined list, genrally called `processing_queue.csv`. Each slurm array job for each stash is executed in parallel.

Before executing `driver_download_pp_convert.sh`, user should edit `config.yaml` to set the job details.

### Steps for using the script

1. Check prerequisites and job details

   - Check that there is a conda environment that has `iris` and `yaml` package. Module jaspy should have this by default.
   - Check for batch job compute allocation. See if user has account with QOS short at least. [See manual](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/batch-computing/how-to-submit-a-job/).
   - Note the details of Account and QOS which will be needed to set `config.yaml`

   ```bash
    $ useraccounts
    # sacctmgr show user vs480 withassoc format=user%-15,account%-20,qos%-50
    User            Account              QOS
    --------------- -------------------- --------------------------------------------------
    vs480           acsis                dask,debug,high,long,short,standard
    vs480           mass                 mass
    vs480           shobu
   ```

2. Edit or create `processing_queue.csv` file

   - This is for sbatch to parallelize the download for each stash. The file should contain 4 columns: `task_id`, `job_id`, `stream`, and `stash`. See `processing_queues/processing_queue.csv` for an example.
   - I find it helpful to create the csv in external point-and-click software like Excel/Google Sheets and export as csv files.
   - Check the available stashes in a suite (See [useful code snippets](#useful-code-snippets))

3. Edit `config.yaml`. This file sets how to run the script for each colum of `processing_queue.csv`.

   - `job`:
     - `name`: job name for slurm
     - `l_batch`: True/False. Must be True for now as the code only accept sbatch execution
     - `l_download`: True/False. Set to True if downloading the -stash items
     - `l_copy_downloaded`: True/False. Set to True if copying the pp files for each stash items from tmp to other directory.
     - `l_convert`: True/False. Set to True of converting pp to nc or zarr. See convert section below.
     - `l_copy_converted`: True/False. Set to True if copying the converted stash items from tmp to other directory.
   - `slurm`:
     - `account`: "account". See prerequisite
     - `partition`: "standard". See prerequisite.
     - `qos`: "short". See prerequisite.
     - `time`: "4:00:00". See prerequisite. Default 4 hours is the upper limit for short qos.
     - `memory`: "200000". See prerequisite.
     - `array_range`: "1-6". Set array range in `processing_queue.csv` to execute the code. This does not have to be the whole range of csv and does not have to be continuous. e.g. '1,4,10-13' is acceptable
   - `path`:
     - `tmp_dir`: "/work/scratch-pw2/\<USERNAME>" the usual scrath location for a user. Use disk with parallel write access for speed.
     - `downloaded_save_dir`: "/gws/nopw/j04/acsis/vs480/model_output". Optional, for storing pp files long-term
     - `converted_save_dir`: "/gws/nopw/j04/acsis/vs480/model_output". Optional, for storing converted files long-term
     - `processing_queue`: "./processing_queues/processing_queue.csv" . Relative or absolute path to the `processing_queue.csv`. Name can be changed to submit different queues. Do not forget to set `array_range` to customise the array job.
   - `download`:
     - `l_extra_query`: True/False. Set to True if need extra query options. Then specify the query option file below.
     - `max_retries`: 3. Optional. Just in case need more than 3 retries for downloading data from MASS
     - `query_options`: "./query_options.txt" optional, for setting extra query options, especially time domain to download, only use if `l_extra_query` is True
   - `convert`:
     - `l_use_downloaded_save_dir`: True/False. Optional. For converting from pp files in `downloaded_save_dir` instead of from `tmp_dir`
     - `format`: "nc"/"zarr" case sensitive (untested). Only nc is working now.

4. Execute the code from the code directory

   On Jasmin, go to this script folder and execute the driver script

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ sh driver_download_pp_convert.sh
   ```

   This should spawn a master job, then the master job should spawn

   - downloading: one array job for each row in the processing queue csv file, as directed by array_range.
   - copying downloaded pp: one array job that depends on the completion of downloading job
   - converting: one array job for stash. This then spawn one job for each pp file. There will be a lot of jobs.
   - copying converted file: one array job for each stash. This will wait for the conversion to be done.

5. Monitor the job

   Each job has its own log in `log/...`

   To monitor slurm jobs, [see here](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/batch-computing/how-to-monitor-slurm-jobs/).

   Auto update

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ watch squeue --me
   ```

   Print out to terminal once

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ squeue --me
   ```

### Why is my job stuck in pending (PD) state?

Note for NODELIST(REASON)

- **Priority**
  - Explanation: job has lower priority than other jobs in the queue, so the job will not start now.
  - Solution: Nothing. LOTUS/MASS is busy, just wait for your turn.
  - If really need to jump the queue
    1. Switch to qos that has higher priority (`short` has the highest priority on LOTUS. `mass` is the only qos for mass partition).
    2. Otherwise, lower job walltime to `time`: 1:00:00
- **Dependency**
  - Explanation: job depend on another job to finish first.
  - Solution: Nothing. Just wait for that preceeding job to finish. This applies for copying and coverting
- **Resources**
  - Explanation: not enough resources
  - Solution: Nothing. Just wait for those earlier jobs to finish for your turn. If really need to jump the queue, see jumping queue in Priority above

---

## Useful code snippets

### List all stash id available in a set (a rose suite)

```bash
jobid="u-dm931" ## EDIT
for f in $(moo ls moose:crum/$jobid/*pp); do stream=$(echo $f| cut -d/ -f4 | cut -d. -f1) ; moo mdls --attribute=stash $f>> $jobid_$stream ; done
```

This lists all stash items in each stream in separate text files.

---

## Known problem

- This code will always try to check for download pp `max_retries` times. It's probably better to don't try if the download is not corrupted to be a good MASS citizen...
- working directory in `driver_download_pp_convert.sh` is relative to current directory and is hardcoded. Probably need a better way of doing this.
- Copying converted nc file does not depend on each nc convert job. That means l_copy_converted needs to be False when l_convert is True for now.

Commit message:

Note on mass download walltime

scripts/data_extraction/download_pp_convert/README.md, after:

# Download pp file from MASS and convert to NetCDF files

This folder contains scripts for streamlining data retrieval from MASS and conversion of pp files to NetCDF files.

This works on JASMIN [sci servers](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/interactive-computing/sci-servers/) (and any other servers with access to mass-cli).

This code is hands off and is works in parallel to retrieve pp and convert to NetCDF files by using scheduling software, `slurm`, so everything runs in parallel on LOTUS compute nodes to speed up conversion.

## Usage

Main script, `driver_download_pp_convert.sh` should be run locally on sci machine of Jasmin.

This script will submit other scripts slurm's `sbatch` for each stash in a user-defined list, genrally called `processing_queue.csv`. Each slurm array job for each stash is executed in parallel.

Before executing `driver_download_pp_convert.sh`, user should edit `config.yaml` to set the job details.

### Steps for using the script

1. Check prerequisites and job details

   - Check that there is a conda environment that has `iris` and `yaml` package. Module jaspy should have this by default.
   - Check for batch job compute allocation. See if user has account with QOS short at least. [See manual](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/batch-computing/how-to-submit-a-job/).
   - Note the details of Account and QOS which will be needed to set `config.yaml`

   ```bash
    $ useraccounts
    # sacctmgr show user vs480 withassoc format=user%-15,account%-20,qos%-50
    User            Account              QOS
    --------------- -------------------- --------------------------------------------------
    vs480           acsis                dask,debug,high,long,short,standard
    vs480           mass                 mass
    vs480           shobu
   ```

2. Edit or create `processing_queue.csv` file

   - This is for sbatch to parallelize the download for each stash. The file should contain 4 columns: `task_id`, `job_id`, `stream`, and `stash`. See `processing_queues/processing_queue.csv` for an example.
   - I find it helpful to create the csv in external point-and-click software like Excel/Google Sheets and export as csv files.
   - Check the available stashes in a suite (See [useful code snippets](#useful-code-snippets))

3. Edit `config.yaml`. This file sets how to run the script for each colum of `processing_queue.csv`.

   - `job`:
     - `name`: job name for slurm
     - `l_batch`: True/False. Must be True for now as the code only accept sbatch execution
     - `l_download`: True/False. Set to True if downloading the -stash items
     - `l_copy_downloaded`: True/False. Set to True if copying the pp files for each stash items from tmp to other directory.
     - `l_convert`: True/False. Set to True of converting pp to nc or zarr. See convert section below.
     - `l_copy_converted`: True/False. Set to True if copying the converted stash items from tmp to other directory.
   - `slurm`:
     - `account`: "account". See prerequisite
     - `partition`: "standard". See prerequisite.
     - `qos`: "short". See prerequisite.
     - `time`: "4:00:00". See prerequisite. Default 4 hours is the upper limit for short qos.
     - `memory`: "200000". See prerequisite.
     - `array_range`: "1-6". Set array range in `processing_queue.csv` to execute the code. This does not have to be the whole range of csv and does not have to be continuous. e.g. '1,4,10-13' is acceptable
   - `path`:
     - `tmp_dir`: "/work/scratch-pw2/\<USERNAME>" the usual scrath location for a user. Use disk with parallel write access for speed.
     - `downloaded_save_dir`: "/gws/nopw/j04/acsis/vs480/model_output". Optional, for storing pp files long-term
     - `converted_save_dir`: "/gws/nopw/j04/acsis/vs480/model_output". Optional, for storing converted files long-term
     - `processing_queue`: "./processing_queues/processing_queue.csv" . Relative or absolute path to the `processing_queue.csv`. Name can be changed to submit different queues. Do not forget to set `array_range` to customise the array job.
   - `download`:
     - `l_extra_query`: True/False. Set to True if need extra query options. Then specify the query option file below.
     - `max_retries`: 3. Optional. Just in case need more than 3 retries for downloading data from MASS
     - `query_options`: "./query_options.txt" optional, for setting extra query options, especially time domain to download, only use if `l_extra_query` is True
   - `convert`:
     - `l_use_downloaded_save_dir`: True/False. Optional. For converting from pp files in `downloaded_save_dir` instead of from `tmp_dir`
     - `format`: "nc"/"zarr" case sensitive (untested). Only nc is working now.

4. Execute the code from the code directory

   On Jasmin, go to this script folder and execute the driver script

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ sh driver_download_pp_convert.sh
   ```

   This should spawn a master job, then the master job should spawn

   - downloading: one array job for each row in the processing queue csv file, as directed by array_range.
   - copying downloaded pp: one array job that depends on the completion of downloading job
   - converting: one array job for stash. This then spawn one job for each pp file. There will be a lot of jobs.
   - copying converted file: one array job for each stash. This will wait for the conversion to be done.

5. Monitor the job

   Each job has its own log in `log/...`

   To monitor slurm jobs, [see here](https://help.jasmin.ac.uk/docs/batch-computing/how-to-monitor-slurm-jobs/).

   Auto update

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ watch squeue --me
   ```

   Print out to terminal once

   ```bash
   [vs480@sci-ph-01 download_pp_convert]$ squeue --me
   ```

### Why is my job stuck in pending (PD) state?

Note for NODELIST(REASON)

- **Priority**
  - Explanation: job has lower priority than other jobs in the queue, so the job will not start now.
  - Solution: Nothing. LOTUS/MASS is busy, just wait for your turn.
  - If really need to jump the queue
    1. Switch to qos that has higher priority (`short` has the highest priority on LOTUS. `mass` is the only qos for mass partition).
    2. Otherwise, lower job walltime to `time`: 1:00:00
- **Dependency**
  - Explanation: job depend on another job to finish first.
  - Solution: Nothing. Just wait for that preceeding job to finish. This applies for copying and coverting
- **Resources**
  - Explanation: not enough resources
  - Solution: Nothing. Just wait for those earlier jobs to finish for your turn. If really need to jump the queue, see jumping queue in Priority above

---

## Useful code snippets

### List all stash id available in a set (a rose suite)

```bash
jobid="u-dm931" ## EDIT
for f in $(moo ls moose:crum/$jobid/*pp); do stream=$(echo $f| cut -d/ -f4 | cut -d. -f1) ; moo mdls --attribute=stash $f>> $jobid_$stream ; done
```

This lists all stash items in each stream in separate text files.

---

## Known problem

- This code will always try to check for download pp `max_retries` times. It's probably better to don't try if the download is not corrupted to be a good MASS citizen...
- mass download walltime is set to 1 hour. Probably could increase (at the expense of queuing time)
- working directory in `driver_download_pp_convert.sh` is relative to current directory and is hardcoded. Probably need a better way of doing this.
- Copying converted nc file does not depend on each nc convert job. That means `l_copy_converted` needs to be False when `l_convert` is True for now.
